Depending on the arm's position, the appropriately coloured lens is illuminated from behind by either an oil lamp, a gas lamp, or an incandescent lamp run at a low voltage (white LED clusters have also been tested for this purpose). Where a green light was required, a blue lens would usually be used. When combined with the mainly yellow-emitting flame of an oil lamp, this produced a green colour; it was important that the resultant colour was not even yellow-green in appearance, as this could have been confused for a distant signal at 'caution'. Later signals using electric lamps used green lenses. Some signals converted to electric lamps from oil, used a yellow-tinted bulb with the original blue lens to maintain the correct colour or from 1996 on the Western Region of British Railways, a 12volt 5watt bulb was fitted but fed at 10.7volts to produce a brilliance approximating to the colour temperature of an oil wick flame, thus providing a correct red or green aspect during darkness. Most railways in Great Britain employed lower quadrant semaphores, that is to say, the arm dropped from the horizontal, the 'danger' aspect to 'clear' at up to 60° below horizontal and variations in appearance between main and subsidiary lines or sidings existed. On some company's lines, a 3-aspect semaphore prevailed and these showed an intermediate 'Caution' aspect and thus bore a three-lensed spectacle. In 1911, the Metropolitan Line was first to use an upper quadrant semaphore, the idea being brought over from the United states. Following nationalisation in 1948, British Railways standardised on upper quadrant semaphores and all regions gradually adopted that mode, replacing lower quadrant signals gradually except that the Western Region stayed with their well-proven and nicely proportioned lower quadrant semaphores with eventually, a heavy cast iron spectacle bearing circular coloured glasses, replacing the former thinly bordered cast spectacle frame with shaped coloured glasses, the main arms being 4 feet (1.2 m) long and subsidiaries 3 feet (0.91 m) with other subsidiaries 2 feet (0.61 m) long. Previous GWR 5-foot (1.5 m) arms placed if higher than 26 feet (7.9 m) above rail level, were changed to 4 feet (1.2 m). All replacements were of enamelled steel and bore the appropriate arm colours, red with white band for 'Stop' arm and chevroned yellow arm with black chevron for 'Distant' (Caution) arms. Both types are white on the reverse side with black band or chevron as appropriate. The final 'Call-on', Shunt' or 'Warning' arms on the Western Region were 2 feet (0.61 m) with red-white-red horizontal stripes and showed a reduced light during darkness with the appropriate black letter, C, S or W, back-lit in the 'proceed' state with a green light shown in that mode. The stop aspect was generally lunar-white during darkness. All are now removed but examples can be seen on UK heritage lines. As at 2020, there are only a few remaining semaphore signals on the Western Region of Network Rail, LED signals having replaced the majority of semaphores.

Materials that were commonly used to make signal posts for semaphore signals included timber, lattice steel, tubular steel and concrete. The Southern Railway in Great Britain frequently made use of old rail for signal posts.

German semaphore home signals, which are totally different in appearance to the British semaphore signal, include one or two white arms with a red outline and a small circular disk at the end of it, and coloured lenses which display the position of the aspect(s) of the signal during nighttime operation and these arms face right of the post. German semaphore distant signals consist of one yellow disk with a black and white outline and an (optional) thin yellow arrow-shaped disk with a black and white outline. Both the disk and arrow have coloured lenses to aid drivers during nighttime. Those types were to be seen in some other countries which used German signalling principles.